JOSS paper/paper.md, before:

---
title: 'rmcorrShiny: A web application for repeated measures correlation'
tags:
  - repeated measures correlation
  - statistics
  - multilevel modeling
  - Shiny
  - correlation
  - repeated measures
authors:
  - name: Laura R. Marusich
    orcid: 0000-0002-3524-6110
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Jonathan Z. Bakdash
    orcid: 0000-0002-1409-4779
    affiliation: "2, 3"
affiliations:
 - name: U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South at the University of Texas at Arlington
   index: 1
 - name: U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South at the University of Texas at Dallas
   index: 2
 - name: Department of Psychology and Special Education, Texas A&M--Commerce
   index: 3
# citation_author: Price-Whelan et. al.
date: 26 March 2021
year: 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
output: rticles::joss_article
csl: apa.csl
journal: JOSS
---

# Summary

The most common techniques for calculating the correlation (e.g., Pearson correlation)
between two variables are based on the assumption that each data point of paired measures
represents an independent observation. Take, for example, a study that calculates the 
correlation between a person's age and the volume of a region of the brain. In this
example, each individual contributes a data point consisting of a brain volume and an age.
However, it is not uncommon for studies to use repeated measures designs, such as a study
that collected the brain region volume and age at two different time points [@raz2005regional].
Each participant in this study contributed two (repeated) data points of paired measures.
Repeated measures of the same individual are no longer independent observations and should
not be analyzed as such. Erroneously modeling repeated measures data as independent
observations is surprisingly prevalent in published research, even though such results
will generally be misleading [@aarts2014solution; @lazic2010problem; @bakdash2020statistical].
A common solution to this problem is to use aggregated data: first taking an average of the 
repeated measures data of each person so that each person again contributes a single paired data
point, and then calculating the correlation from these averages (between-participants).  

Instead of aggregation, an alternative solution is to calculate the repeated measures
correlation [@Bakdash2017; @Bland446; @Bland633], which assesses the common
intra-individual (within-participants) association for paired repeated measures data. The
repeated measures correlation technique is conceptually similar to a null multilevel model,
with a common slope but varying intercept for each individual. Calculating the repeated
measures correlation has multiple potential benefits. It is simpler and more
straightforward to implement than a multilevel model, with the potential for far greater
statistical power than aggregation. It also has the potential to provide insights into
patterns among individuals that aggregation may obscure [@Bakdash2017]. 

We previously developed the ``rmcorr`` R package [@R-rmcorr] to make the repeated measures
correlation technique widely available for researchers; it has since also been adapted as 
a function in the ``Pingouin`` statistics package [@Vallat2018] for Python. However, the use 
of both of these packages requires some facility with  programming languages and thus they 
are not universally accessible. 

Here we introduce the ``rmcorrShiny`` application, which provides an intuitive graphical
interface for computing and plotting the repeated measures correlation (see Figure 1 below
demonstrating the application using brain area volume and age data from Raz [-@raz2005regional]).  

The primary features of ``rmcorrShiny`` include:

* The ability to import data in a variety of different file formats or to use one of four included sample 
datasets.
* The display of raw output from ``rmcorr`` as well as formatted output for reporting
results. 
* Multiple options to generate and customize ``rmcorr`` plots (making use of the 
``ggplot2`` package [@R-ggplot2; @ggplot22016] and palettes from the ``RColorBrewer`` 
[@R-RColorBrewer] and ``pals`` [@R-pals] packages).
* Customized R code using the data and options chosen by the user that can be directly
pasted and executed in R to produce the same output as in ``rmcorrShiny``.
* The ability to download plots (in multiple file formats) or a .zip file of all output.

Note that many features in ``rmcorrShiny``, including the panel interface, were based on modifications of the ``Shiny`` [@R-shiny-ref] code in the 
``Raincloud-shiny`` app [@raincloudshiny].  
\textcolor{red}{(Laura: I like the new language, but what do you think about the citation?
I found his name through Twitter, but maybe it's kind of creepy to do that? He doesn't have his name on the app or on the github). It would 
be nice to cite by name: I found this on the repo for raincloud-shiny: https://github.com/gabrifc I added the name to the repo citation, switched it to 
software}

\textcolor{red}{Screenshot (placeholder until we have a near-final version?) Added a placeholder figure. The quality is very medicore. Will save it uncompressed for the final version}

\begin{figure}[h]
\includegraphics{Raz_rmcorr_plot.png}
\caption{`` rmcorrShiny`` plot of neuroscience data from [@raz2005regional], two paired repeated measures of age and volume for a brain area approximately 5 years apart. Note the strong, the strong common negative association among participants for decreasing volume in the brain area with age regardless of initial age at the first time period.}
\end{figure}

``rmcorrShiny`` can be used in a web browser [**here**](https://lmarusich.shinyapps.io/shiny_rmcorr/) 
or it can be installed from Github and run in R, using the following commands \textcolor{red}{(BIG TODO):}

```r
devtools::install_github("lmarusich/rmcorrShiny")
library(rmcorrShiny)
rmcorrShiny::rmcorrShiny_run()
```


# Acknowledgements

The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should 
not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of 
the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. 
Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for 
Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation. 

\textcolor{red}{We acknowledge contributions from.... }

# References

Commit message:

edit paper, fix citation in caption issue, add sci notation

JOSS paper/paper.md, after:

---
title: 'rmcorrShiny: A web application for repeated measures correlation'
tags:
  - repeated measures correlation
  - statistics
  - multilevel modeling
  - Shiny
  - correlation
  - repeated measures
authors:
  - name: Laura R. Marusich
    orcid: 0000-0002-3524-6110
    affiliation: 1 # (Multiple affiliations must be quoted)
  - name: Jonathan Z. Bakdash
    orcid: 0000-0002-1409-4779
    affiliation: "2, 3"
affiliations:
 - name: U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South at the University of Texas at Arlington
   index: 1
 - name: U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory South at the University of Texas at Dallas
   index: 2
 - name: Department of Psychology and Special Education, Texas A&M--Commerce
   index: 3
date: 29 March 2021
year: 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
output: rticles::joss_article
csl: apa.csl
journal: JOSS
---

# Summary

The most common techniques for calculating the correlation (e.g., Pearson correlation)
between two variables are based on the assumption that each data point of paired measures
represents an independent observation. Take, for example, a study that calculates the 
correlation between a person's age and the volume of a region of the brain. In this
example, each individual contributes a data point consisting of a brain volume and an age.
However, it is not uncommon for studies to use repeated measures designs, such as a study
that collected the brain region volume and age at two different time points [@raz2005regional].
Each participant in this study contributed two (repeated) data points of paired measures.
Repeated measures of the same individual are no longer independent observations and should
not be analyzed as such. Erroneously modeling repeated measures data as independent
observations is surprisingly prevalent in published research, even though such results
will generally be misleading [@aarts2014solution; @lazic2010problem; @bakdash2020statistical].
A common solution to this problem is to use aggregated data: first taking an average of the 
repeated measures data of each person so that each person again contributes a single paired data
point, and then calculating the correlation from these averages (between-participants).  

Instead of aggregation, an alternative solution is to calculate the repeated measures
correlation [@Bakdash2017; @Bland446; @Bland633], which assesses the common
intra-individual (within-participants) association for paired repeated measures data. The
repeated measures correlation technique is conceptually similar to a null multilevel model,
with a common slope but varying intercept for each individual. Calculating the repeated
measures correlation has multiple potential benefits. It is simpler and more
straightforward to implement than a multilevel model, with the potential for far greater
statistical power than aggregation. It may also provide insights into patterns among
individuals that aggregation may obscure [@Bakdash2017]. 

# Statement of need

We previously developed the ``rmcorr`` R package [@R-rmcorr] to make the repeated measures
correlation technique widely available for researchers; it has since also been adapted as 
a function in the ``Pingouin`` statistics package [@Vallat2018] for Python. However, the use 
of both of these packages requires some facility with  programming languages and thus they 
are not universally accessible. 

Here we introduce ``rmcorrShiny``, a ``Shiny`` [@R-shiny-ref] app, which provides an intuitive graphical
interface for computing and plotting the repeated measures correlation (see Figure 1 below). 
The primary features of ``rmcorrShiny`` include:

* The ability to import data in a variety of different file formats or to use one of four included sample 
datasets.
* The display of raw output from ``rmcorr`` as well as formatted output for reporting
results. 
* Multiple options to generate and customize ``rmcorr`` plots (making use of the 
``ggplot2`` package [@R-ggplot2; @ggplot22016] and palettes from the ``RColorBrewer`` 
[@R-RColorBrewer] and ``pals`` [@R-pals] packages).
* Customized R code using the data and options chosen by the user that can be directly
pasted and executed in R to produce the same output as in ``rmcorrShiny``.
* The ability to download plots (in multiple file formats) or a .zip file of all output.

Note that many features in ``rmcorrShiny``, including the panel interface, were based on modifications of code from the ``Raincloud-shiny`` app [@raincloudshiny].  


\textcolor{red}{Screenshot Added a placeholder figure. The quality is very medicore. Will save it uncompressed for the final version.
LM: I think using the plot output tab is good for the screenshot, but maybe the choosing variables tab for the input? we can talk about it}

![Screenshot of the `` rmcorrShiny`` app, showing an input tab with \textcolor{red}{Discuss} options and the Plot output tab, using example data from Raz et al. [-@raz2005regional]\label{fig:example}](Raz_rmcorr_plot.png)

``rmcorrShiny`` can be used in a web browser [**here**](https://lmarusich.shinyapps.io/shiny_rmcorr/) 
or the package can be installed from Github and run in R, using the following commands \textcolor{red}{(BIG TODO):}

```r
devtools::install_github("lmarusich/rmcorrShiny")
library(rmcorrShiny)
rmcorrShiny::rmcorrShiny_run()
```


# Acknowledgements

The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should 
not be interpreted as representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of 
the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Army Research Laboratory or the U.S. 
Government. The U.S. Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for 
Government purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation. 

\textcolor{red}{We acknowledge contributions from.... }

# References
